Edited text from Wikipedia

Python is a widely used general-purpose, high-level programming language. Its design philosophy emphasizes code readability, and its syntax allows programmers to express concepts in fewer lines of code than would be possible in languages such as C. The language provides constructs intended to enable clear programs on both a small and large scale.

Python supports multiple programming paradigms, including object-oriented, imperative and functional programming or procedural styles. It features a dynamic type system and automatic memory management and has a large and comprehensive standard library.
Like other dynamic languages, Python is often used as a scripting language, but is also used in a wide range of non-scripting contexts. Using third-party tools, Python code can be packaged into standalone executable programs (such as Py2exe, or Pyinstaller). Python interpreters are available for many operating systems.
CPython, the reference implementation of Python, is free and open source software and has a community-based development model, as do nearly all of its alternative implementations. CPython is managed by the non-profit Python Software Foundation.

History
Guido van Rossum, the creator of Python
Python was conceived in the late 1980s and its implementation was started in December 1989 by Guido van Rossum at CWI in the Netherlands as a successor to the ABC language (itself inspired by SETL) capable of exception handling and interfacing with the Amoeba operating system. Van Rossum is Python's principal author, and his continuing central role in deciding the direction of Python is reflected in the title given to him by the Python community, Benevolent Dictator for Life (BDFL).
Python 2.0 was released on 16 October 2000, with many major new features including a full garbage collector and support for Unicode. With this release the development process was changed and became more transparent and community-backed.
Python 3.0 (also called Python 3000 or py3k), a major, backwards-incompatible release, was released on 3 December 2008 after a long period of testing. Many of its major features have been backported to the backwards-compatible Python 2.6 and 2.7.
Features and philosophy

Python is a multi-paradigm programming language: object-oriented programming and structured programming are fully supported, and there are a number of language features which support functional programming and aspect-oriented programming (including by metaprogramming and by magic methods). Many other paradigms are supported using extensions, including design by contract and logic programming.
Python uses dynamic typing and a combination of reference counting and a cycle-detecting garbage collector for memory management. An important feature of Python is dynamic name resolution (late binding), which binds method and variable names during program execution.
The design of Python offers only limited support for functional programming in the Lisp tradition. The language has map(), reduce() and filter() functions, comprehensions for lists, dictionaries, and sets, as well as generator expressions. The standard library has two modules (itertools and functools) that implement functional tools borrowed from Haskell and Standard ML.

The core philosophy of the language is summarized by the document "PEP 20 (The Zen of Python)", which includes aphorisms such as:
Beautiful is better than ugly.
Explicit is better than implicit.
Simple is better than complex.
Complex is better than complicated.
Readability counts.
Rather than requiring all desired functionality to be built into the language's core, Python was designed to be highly extensible. Python can also be embedded in existing applications that need a programmable interface. This design of a small core language with a large standard library and an easily extensible interpreter was intended by Van Rossum from the very start because of his frustrations with ABC (which espoused the opposite mindset).

While offering choice in coding methodology, the Python philosophy rejects exuberant syntax, such as in Perl, in favor of a sparser, less-cluttered grammar. As Alex Martelli put it: "To describe something as clever is not considered a compliment in the Python culture." Python's philosophy rejects the Perl "there is more than one way to do it" approach to language design in favor of "there should be one and preferably only one obvious way to do it".

Python's developers strive to avoid premature optimization, and moreover, reject patches to non-critical parts of CPython which would offer a marginal increase in speed at the cost of clarity. When speed is important, Python programmers use PyPy, a just-in-time compiler, or move time-critical functions to extension modules written in languages such as C. Cython is also available which translates a Python script into C and makes direct C level API calls into the Python interpreter.

An important goal of the Python developers is making Python fun to use. This is reflected in the origin of the name which comes from Monty Python, and in an occasionally playful approach to tutorials and reference materials, for example using spam and eggs instead of the standard foo and bar.

A common neologism in the Python community is pythonic, which can have a wide range of meanings related to program style. To say that code is pythonic is to say that it uses Python idioms well, that it is natural or shows fluency in the language, that it conforms with Python's minimalist philosophy and emphasis on readability. In contrast, code that is difficult to understand or reads like a rough transcription from another programming language is called unpythonic.
Users and admirers of Python most especially those considered knowledgeable or experienced are often referred to as Pythonists, Pythonistas, and Pythoneers.
Syntax and semantics

Main article: Python syntax and semantics
Python is intended to be a highly readable language. It is designed to have an uncluttered visual layout, frequently using English keywords where other languages use punctuation. Furthermore Python has a smaller number of syntactic exceptions and special cases than C or Pascal.

Indentation
Python uses whitespace indentation, rather than curly braces or keywords, to delimit blocks; a feature also termed the off-side rule. An increase in indentation comes after certain statements; a decrease in indentation signifies the end of the current block. It is considered beneficial by Python programmers, others have criticized it.

Statements and control flow
Python's statements include (among others):
The if statement, which conditionally executes a block of code, along with else and elif (a contraction of else-if).
The for statement, which iterates over an iterable object, capturing each element to a local variable for use by the attached block.
The while statement, which executes a block of code as long as its condition is true.
The try statement, which allows exceptions raised in its attached code block to be caught and handled by except clauses; it also ensures that clean-up code in a finally block will always be run regardless of how the block exits.
The class statement, which executes a block of code and attaches its local namespace to a class, for use in object-oriented programming.
The def statement, which defines a function or method.
The with statement (from Python 2.5), which encloses a code block within a context manager (for example, acquiring a lock before the block of code is run and releasing the lock afterwards, or opening a file and then closing it), allowing RAII-like behavior.
The pass statement, which serves as a NOP. It is syntactically needed to create an empty code block.
The assert statement, used during debugging to check for conditions that ought to apply.
The yield statement, which returns a value from a generator function. From Python 2.5, yield is also an operator. This form is used to implement coroutines.
The import statement, which is used to import modules whose functions or variables can be used in the current program.
Python does not support tail-call optimization or first-class continuations, and, according to Guido van Rossum, it never will. However, better support for coroutine-like functionality is provided in 2.5, by extending Python's generators. Prior to 2.5, generators were lazy iterators; information was passed unidirectionally out of the generator. As of Python 2.5, it is possible to pass information back into a generator function, and as of Python 3.3, the information can be passed through multiple stack levels.

Expressions
Python expressions are similar to languages such as C and Java:
In Python 2, the / operator on integers does integer division; it truncates the result to an integer. Floating-point division on integers can be achieved by converting one of the integers to a float (e.g. float(x) / y). In Python 3, the result of / is always a floating-point value. This behaviour can be enabled in Python 2.2+ using from __future__ import division. In both Python 2.2+ and Python 3, // can be used to do integer division.
In Python, == compares by value, in contrast to Java, where it compares by reference. (Value comparisons in Java use the equals() method.) Python's is operator may be used to compare object identities (comparison by reference). Comparisons may be chained, for example a <= b <= c.
Python uses the words and, or, not for its boolean operators rather than the symbolic &&, ||, ! used in Java and C.
Python has a type of expression termed a list comprehension. Python 2.4 extended list comprehensions into a more general expression termed a generator expression.
Anonymous functions are implemented using lambda expressions; however, these are limited in that the body can only be a single expression.
Conditional expressions in Python are written as x if c else y (different in order of operands from the ?: operator common to many other languages).
Python makes a distinction between lists and tuples. Lists are written as [1, 2, 3], are mutable, and cannot be used as the keys of dictionaries (dictionary keys must be immutable in Python). Tuples are written as (1, 2, 3), are immutable and thus can be used as the keys of dictionaries, provided all elements of the tuple are immutable. The parentheses around the tuple are optional in some contexts. Tuples can appear on the left side of an equal sign; hence a statement like x, y = y, x can be used to swap two variables.
Python has a "string format" operator %. This functions analogous to printf format strings in C, e.g. "foo=%s bar=%d" % ("blah", 2) evaluates to "foo=blah bar=2". In Python 3 and 2.6+, this was supplemented by the format() method of the str class, e.g. "foo={0} bar={1}".format("blah", 2).

Python has various kinds of string literals:
Strings delimited by single or double quotation marks. Unlike in Unix shells, Perl and Perl-influenced languages, single quotation marks and double quotation marks function similarly. Both kinds of string use the backslash (\) as an escape character and there is no implicit string interpolation such as "$foo".
Triple-quoted strings, which begin and end with a series of three single or double quotation marks. They may span multiple lines and function like here documents in shells, Perl and Ruby.

Raw string varieties, denoted by prefixing the string literal with an r. No escape sequences are interpreted; hence raw strings are useful where literal backslashes are common, such as regular expressions and Windows-style paths. Compare "@-quoting" in C#.
Python has index and slice expressions on lists, denoted as a[key], a[start:stop] or a[start:stop:step]. Indexes are zero-based, and negative indexes are relative to the end. Slices take elements from the start index up to, but not including, the stop index. The third slice parameter, called step or stride, allows elements to be skipped and reversed. Slice indexes may be omitted, for example a[:] returns a copy of the entire list. Each element of a slice is a shallow copy.
In Python, a distinction between expressions and statements is rigidly enforced, in contrast to languages such as Common Lisp, Scheme, or Ruby. This leads to some duplication of functionality. For example:
List comprehensions vs. for-loops
Conditional expressions vs. if blocks
The eval() vs. exec() built-in functions (in Python 2, exec is a statement); the former is for expressions, the latter is for statements.
Statements cannot be a part of an expression and so list and other comprehensions or lambda expressions, all being expressions, cannot contain statements. A particular case of this is that an assignment statement such as a = 1 cannot form part of the conditional expression of a conditional statement. This has the advantage of avoiding a classic C error of mistaking an assignment operator = for an equality operator == in conditions: if (c = 1) { ... } is valid C code but if c = 1: ... causes a syntax error in Python.

Methods
Methods on objects are functions attached to the object's class; the syntax instance.method(argument) is, for normal methods and functions, syntactic sugar for Class.method(instance, argument). Python methods have an explicit self parameter to access instance data, in contrast to the implicit self in some other object-oriented programming languages (for example, Java, C++ or Ruby).

Typing
Python uses duck typing and has typed objects but untyped variable names. Type constraints are not checked at compile time; rather, operations on an object may fail, signifying that the given object is not of a suitable type. Despite being dynamically typed, Python is strongly typed, forbidding operations that are not well-defined (for example, adding a number to a string) rather than silently attempting to make sense of them.
Python allows programmers to define their own types using classes, which are most often used for object-oriented programming. New instances of classes are constructed by calling the class (for example, SpamClass() or EggsClass()), and the classes themselves are instances of the metaclass type (itself an instance of itself), allowing metaprogramming and reflection.

Prior to version 3.0, Python had two kinds of classes: "old-style" and "new-style". Old-style classes were eliminated in Python 3.0, making all classes new-style. In versions between 2.2 and 3.0, both kinds of classes could be used. The syntax of both styles is the same, the difference being whether the class object is inherited from, directly or indirectly (all new-style classes inherit from object and are instances of type).

Article taken from Wikipedia 2013